docs/tools/shell.md, before:

# Shell Tool (`run_shell_command`)

This document describes the `run_shell_command` tool for the Gemini CLI.

## Description

Use `run_shell_command` to interact with the underlying system, run scripts, or perform command-line operations. `run_shell_command` executes a given shell command. On Windows, the command will be executed with `cmd.exe /c`. On other platforms, the command will be executed with `bash -c`.

### Arguments

`run_shell_command` takes the following arguments:

- `command` (string, required): The exact shell command to execute.
- `description` (string, optional): A brief description of the command's purpose, which will be shown to the user.
- `directory` (string, optional): The directory (relative to the project root) in which to execute the command. If not provided, the command runs in the project root.

## How to use `run_shell_command` with the Gemini CLI

When using `run_shell_command`, the command is executed as a subprocess. `run_shell_command` can start background processes using `&`. The tool returns detailed information about the execution, including:

- `Command`: The command that was executed.
- `Directory`: The directory where the command was run.
- `Stdout`: Output from the standard output stream.
- `Stderr`: Output from the standard error stream.
- `Error`: Any error message reported by the subprocess.
- `Exit Code`: The exit code of the command.
- `Signal`: The signal number if the command was terminated by a signal.
- `Background PIDs`: A list of PIDs for any background processes started.

Usage:

```
run_shell_command(command="Your commands.", description="Your description of the command.", directory="Your execution directory.")
```

## `run_shell_command` examples

List files in the current directory:

```
run_shell_command(command="ls -la")
```

Run a script in a specific directory:

```
run_shell_command(command="./my_script.sh", directory="scripts", description="Run my custom script")
```

Start a background server:

```
run_shell_command(command="npm run dev &", description="Start development server in background")
```

## Important notes

- **Security:** Be cautious when executing commands, especially those constructed from user input, to prevent security vulnerabilities.
- **Interactive commands:** Avoid commands that require interactive user input, as this can cause the tool to hang. Use non-interactive flags if available (e.g., `npm init -y`).
- **Error handling:** Check the `Stderr`, `Error`, and `Exit Code` fields to determine if a command executed successfully.
- **Background processes:** When a command is run in the background with `&`, the tool will return immediately and the process will continue to run in the background. The `Background PIDs` field will contain the process ID of the background process.

## Command Restrictions

You can restrict the commands that can be executed by the `run_shell_command` tool by using the `coreTools` and `excludeTools` settings in your configuration file.

- `coreTools`: To restrict `run_shell_command` to a specific set of commands, add entries to the `coreTools` list in the format `run_shell_command(<command>)`. For example, `"coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)"]` will only allow `git` commands. Including the generic `run_shell_command` acts as a wildcard, allowing any command not explicitly blocked.
- `excludeTools`: To block specific commands, add entries to the `excludeTools` list in the format `run_shell_command(<command>)`. For example, `"excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm)"]` will block `rm` commands.

The validation logic is designed to be secure and flexible:

1.  **Command Chaining Disabled**: The tool automatically splits commands chained with `&&`, `||`, or `;` and validates each part separately. If any part of the chain is disallowed, the entire command is blocked.
2.  **Prefix Matching**: The tool uses prefix matching. For example, if you allow `git`, you can run `git status` or `git log`.
3.  **Blocklist Precedence**: The `excludeTools` list is always checked first. If a command matches a blocked prefix, it will be denied, even if it also matches an allowed prefix in `coreTools`.

### Command Restriction Examples

**Allow only specific command prefixes**

To allow only `git` and `npm` commands, and block all others:

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)", "run_shell_command(npm)"]
}
```

- `git status`: Allowed
- `npm install`: Allowed
- `ls -l`: Blocked

**Block specific command prefixes**

To block `rm` and allow all other commands:

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command"],
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm)"]
}
```

- `rm -rf /`: Blocked
- `git status`: Allowed
- `npm install`: Allowed

**Blocklist takes precedence**

If a command prefix is in both `coreTools` and `excludeTools`, it will be blocked.

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)"],
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(git push)"]
}
```

- `git push origin main`: Blocked
- `git status`: Allowed

**Block all shell commands**

To block all shell commands, add the `run_shell_command` wildcard to `excludeTools`:

```json
{
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command"]
}
```

- `ls -l`: Blocked
- `any other command`: Blocked

## Security Note for `excludeTools`

Command-specific restrictions in
`excludeTools` for `run_shell_command` are based on simple string matching and can be easily bypassed. This feature is **not a security mechanism** and should not be relied upon to safely execute untrusted code. It is recommended to use `coreTools` to explicitly select commands
that can be executed.

Commit message:

feat: add GEMINI_CLI environment variable to spawned shell commands (#4791)

docs/tools/shell.md, after:

# Shell Tool (`run_shell_command`)

This document describes the `run_shell_command` tool for the Gemini CLI.

## Description

Use `run_shell_command` to interact with the underlying system, run scripts, or perform command-line operations. `run_shell_command` executes a given shell command. On Windows, the command will be executed with `cmd.exe /c`. On other platforms, the command will be executed with `bash -c`.

### Arguments

`run_shell_command` takes the following arguments:

- `command` (string, required): The exact shell command to execute.
- `description` (string, optional): A brief description of the command's purpose, which will be shown to the user.
- `directory` (string, optional): The directory (relative to the project root) in which to execute the command. If not provided, the command runs in the project root.

## How to use `run_shell_command` with the Gemini CLI

When using `run_shell_command`, the command is executed as a subprocess. `run_shell_command` can start background processes using `&`. The tool returns detailed information about the execution, including:

- `Command`: The command that was executed.
- `Directory`: The directory where the command was run.
- `Stdout`: Output from the standard output stream.
- `Stderr`: Output from the standard error stream.
- `Error`: Any error message reported by the subprocess.
- `Exit Code`: The exit code of the command.
- `Signal`: The signal number if the command was terminated by a signal.
- `Background PIDs`: A list of PIDs for any background processes started.

Usage:

```
run_shell_command(command="Your commands.", description="Your description of the command.", directory="Your execution directory.")
```

## `run_shell_command` examples

List files in the current directory:

```
run_shell_command(command="ls -la")
```

Run a script in a specific directory:

```
run_shell_command(command="./my_script.sh", directory="scripts", description="Run my custom script")
```

Start a background server:

```
run_shell_command(command="npm run dev &", description="Start development server in background")
```

## Important notes

- **Security:** Be cautious when executing commands, especially those constructed from user input, to prevent security vulnerabilities.
- **Interactive commands:** Avoid commands that require interactive user input, as this can cause the tool to hang. Use non-interactive flags if available (e.g., `npm init -y`).
- **Error handling:** Check the `Stderr`, `Error`, and `Exit Code` fields to determine if a command executed successfully.
- **Background processes:** When a command is run in the background with `&`, the tool will return immediately and the process will continue to run in the background. The `Background PIDs` field will contain the process ID of the background process.

## Environment Variables

When `run_shell_command` executes a command, it sets the `GEMINI_CLI=1` environment variable in the subprocess's environment. This allows scripts or tools to detect if they are being run from within the Gemini CLI.

## Command Restrictions

You can restrict the commands that can be executed by the `run_shell_command` tool by using the `coreTools` and `excludeTools` settings in your configuration file.

- `coreTools`: To restrict `run_shell_command` to a specific set of commands, add entries to the `coreTools` list in the format `run_shell_command(<command>)`. For example, `"coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)"]` will only allow `git` commands. Including the generic `run_shell_command` acts as a wildcard, allowing any command not explicitly blocked.
- `excludeTools`: To block specific commands, add entries to the `excludeTools` list in the format `run_shell_command(<command>)`. For example, `"excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm)"]` will block `rm` commands.

The validation logic is designed to be secure and flexible:

1.  **Command Chaining Disabled**: The tool automatically splits commands chained with `&&`, `||`, or `;` and validates each part separately. If any part of the chain is disallowed, the entire command is blocked.
2.  **Prefix Matching**: The tool uses prefix matching. For example, if you allow `git`, you can run `git status` or `git log`.
3.  **Blocklist Precedence**: The `excludeTools` list is always checked first. If a command matches a blocked prefix, it will be denied, even if it also matches an allowed prefix in `coreTools`.

### Command Restriction Examples

**Allow only specific command prefixes**

To allow only `git` and `npm` commands, and block all others:

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)", "run_shell_command(npm)"]
}
```

- `git status`: Allowed
- `npm install`: Allowed
- `ls -l`: Blocked

**Block specific command prefixes**

To block `rm` and allow all other commands:

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command"],
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm)"]
}
```

- `rm -rf /`: Blocked
- `git status`: Allowed
- `npm install`: Allowed

**Blocklist takes precedence**

If a command prefix is in both `coreTools` and `excludeTools`, it will be blocked.

```json
{
  "coreTools": ["run_shell_command(git)"],
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(git push)"]
}
```

- `git push origin main`: Blocked
- `git status`: Allowed

**Block all shell commands**

To block all shell commands, add the `run_shell_command` wildcard to `excludeTools`:

```json
{
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command"]
}
```

- `ls -l`: Blocked
- `any other command`: Blocked

## Security Note for `excludeTools`

Command-specific restrictions in
`excludeTools` for `run_shell_command` are based on simple string matching and can be easily bypassed. This feature is **not a security mechanism** and should not be relied upon to safely execute untrusted code. It is recommended to use `coreTools` to explicitly select commands
that can be executed.
