docs/extensions/index.md, before:

# Gemini CLI Extensions

_This documentation is up-to-date with the v0.4.0 release._

Gemini CLI extensions package prompts, MCP servers, and custom commands into a
familiar and user-friendly format. With extensions, you can expand the
capabilities of Gemini CLI and share those capabilities with others. They are
designed to be easily installable and shareable.

See [getting started docs](getting-started-extensions.md) for a guide on
creating your first extension.

See [releasing docs](extension-releasing.md) for an advanced guide on setting up
GitHub releases.

## Extension management

We offer a suite of extension management tools using `gemini extensions`
commands.

Note that these commands are not supported from within the CLI, although you can
list installed extensions using the `/extensions list` subcommand.

Note that all of these commands will only be reflected in active CLI sessions on
restart.

### Installing an extension

You can install an extension using `gemini extensions install` with either a
GitHub URL or a local path.

Note that we create a copy of the installed extension, so you will need to run
`gemini extensions update` to pull in changes from both locally-defined
extensions and those on GitHub.

NOTE: If you are installing an extension from GitHub, you'll need to have `git`
installed on your machine. See
[git installation instructions](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
for help.

```
gemini extensions install https://github.com/gemini-cli-extensions/security
```

This will install the Gemini CLI Security extension, which offers support for a
`/security:analyze` command.

### Uninstalling an extension

To uninstall, run `gemini extensions uninstall extension-name`, so, in the case
of the install example:

```
gemini extensions uninstall gemini-cli-security
```

### Disabling an extension

Extensions are, by default, enabled across all workspaces. You can disable an
extension entirely or for specific workspace.

For example, `gemini extensions disable extension-name` will disable the
extension at the user level, so it will be disabled everywhere.
`gemini extensions disable extension-name --scope=workspace` will only disable
the extension in the current workspace.

### Enabling an extension

You can enable extensions using `gemini extensions enable extension-name`. You
can also enable an extension for a specific workspace using
`gemini extensions enable extension-name --scope=workspace` from within that
workspace.

This is useful if you have an extension disabled at the top-level and only
enabled in specific places.

### Updating an extension

For extensions installed from a local path or a git repository, you can
explicitly update to the latest version (as reflected in the
`gemini-extension.json` `version` field) with
`gemini extensions update extension-name`.

You can update all extensions with:

```
gemini extensions update --all
```

## Extension creation

We offer commands to make extension development easier.

### Create a boilerplate extension

We offer several example extensions `context`, `custom-commands`,
`exclude-tools` and `mcp-server`. You can view these examples
[here](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli/tree/main/packages/cli/src/commands/extensions/examples).

To copy one of these examples into a development directory using the type of
your choosing, run:

```
gemini extensions new path/to/directory custom-commands
```

### Link a local extension

The `gemini extensions link` command will create a symbolic link from the
extension installation directory to the development path.

This is useful so you don't have to run `gemini extensions update` every time
you make changes you'd like to test.

```
gemini extensions link path/to/directory
```

## How it works

On startup, Gemini CLI looks for extensions in `<home>/.gemini/extensions`

Extensions exist as a directory that contains a `gemini-extension.json` file.
For example:

`<home>/.gemini/extensions/my-extension/gemini-extension.json`

### `gemini-extension.json`

The `gemini-extension.json` file contains the configuration for the extension.
The file has the following structure:

```json
{
  "name": "my-extension",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "mcpServers": {
    "my-server": {
      "command": "node my-server.js"
    }
  },
  "contextFileName": "GEMINI.md",
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command"]
}
```

- `name`: The name of the extension. This is used to uniquely identify the
  extension and for conflict resolution when extension commands have the same
  name as user or project commands. The name should be lowercase or numbers and
  use dashes instead of underscores or spaces. This is how users will refer to
  your extension in the CLI. Note that we expect this name to match the
  extension directory name.
- `version`: The version of the extension.
- `mcpServers`: A map of MCP servers to configure. The key is the name of the
  server, and the value is the server configuration. These servers will be
  loaded on startup just like MCP servers configured in a
  [`settings.json` file](../get-started/configuration.md). If both an extension
  and a `settings.json` file configure an MCP server with the same name, the
  server defined in the `settings.json` file takes precedence.
  - Note that all MCP server configuration options are supported except for
    `trust`.
- `contextFileName`: The name of the file that contains the context for the
  extension. This will be used to load the context from the extension directory.
  If this property is not used but a `GEMINI.md` file is present in your
  extension directory, then that file will be loaded.
- `excludeTools`: An array of tool names to exclude from the model. You can also
  specify command-specific restrictions for tools that support it, like the
  `run_shell_command` tool. For example,
  `"excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm -rf)"]` will block the `rm -rf`
  command. Note that this differs from the MCP server `excludeTools`
  functionality, which can be listed in the MCP server config.

When Gemini CLI starts, it loads all the extensions and merges their
configurations. If there are any conflicts, the workspace configuration takes
precedence.

### Custom commands

Extensions can provide [custom commands](../cli/custom-commands.md) by placing
TOML files in a `commands/` subdirectory within the extension directory. These
commands follow the same format as user and project custom commands and use
standard naming conventions.

**Example**

An extension named `gcp` with the following structure:

```
.gemini/extensions/gcp/
├── gemini-extension.json
└── commands/
    ├── deploy.toml
    └── gcs/
        └── sync.toml
```

Would provide these commands:

- `/deploy` - Shows as `[gcp] Custom command from deploy.toml` in help
- `/gcs:sync` - Shows as `[gcp] Custom command from sync.toml` in help

### Conflict resolution

Extension commands have the lowest precedence. When a conflict occurs with user
or project commands:

1. **No conflict**: Extension command uses its natural name (e.g., `/deploy`)
2. **With conflict**: Extension command is renamed with the extension prefix
   (e.g., `/gcp.deploy`)

For example, if both a user and the `gcp` extension define a `deploy` command:

- `/deploy` - Executes the user's deploy command
- `/gcp.deploy` - Executes the extension's deploy command (marked with `[gcp]`
  tag)

## Variables

Gemini CLI extensions allow variable substitution in `gemini-extension.json`.
This can be useful if e.g., you need the current directory to run an MCP server
using `"cwd": "${extensionPath}${/}run.ts"`.

**Supported variables:**

| variable                   | description                                                                                                                                                     |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `${extensionPath}`         | The fully-qualified path of the extension in the user's filesystem e.g., '/Users/username/.gemini/extensions/example-extension'. This will not unwrap symlinks. |
| `${workspacePath}`         | The fully-qualified path of the current workspace.                                                                                                              |
| `${/} or ${pathSeparator}` | The path separator (differs per OS).                                                                                                                            |

Commit message:

Docs: Point to extensions gallery from extensions docs in the project (#10763)
Co-authored-by: Jack Wotherspoon <jackwoth@google.com>
Co-authored-by: Pascal Birchler <pascal.birchler@gmail.com>

docs/extensions/index.md, after:

# Gemini CLI Extensions

_This documentation is up-to-date with the v0.4.0 release._

Gemini CLI extensions package prompts, MCP servers, and custom commands into a
familiar and user-friendly format. With extensions, you can expand the
capabilities of Gemini CLI and share those capabilities with others. They are
designed to be easily installable and shareable.

To see examples of extensions, you can browse a gallery of
[Gemini CLI extensions](https://geminicli.com/extensions/browse/).

See [getting started docs](getting-started-extensions.md) for a guide on
creating your first extension.

See [releasing docs](extension-releasing.md) for an advanced guide on setting up
GitHub releases.

## Extension management

We offer a suite of extension management tools using `gemini extensions`
commands.

Note that these commands are not supported from within the CLI, although you can
list installed extensions using the `/extensions list` subcommand.

Note that all of these commands will only be reflected in active CLI sessions on
restart.

### Installing an extension

You can install an extension using `gemini extensions install` with either a
GitHub URL or a local path.

Note that we create a copy of the installed extension, so you will need to run
`gemini extensions update` to pull in changes from both locally-defined
extensions and those on GitHub.

NOTE: If you are installing an extension from GitHub, you'll need to have `git`
installed on your machine. See
[git installation instructions](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git)
for help.

```
gemini extensions install https://github.com/gemini-cli-extensions/security
```

This will install the Gemini CLI Security extension, which offers support for a
`/security:analyze` command.

### Uninstalling an extension

To uninstall, run `gemini extensions uninstall extension-name`, so, in the case
of the install example:

```
gemini extensions uninstall gemini-cli-security
```

### Disabling an extension

Extensions are, by default, enabled across all workspaces. You can disable an
extension entirely or for specific workspace.

For example, `gemini extensions disable extension-name` will disable the
extension at the user level, so it will be disabled everywhere.
`gemini extensions disable extension-name --scope=workspace` will only disable
the extension in the current workspace.

### Enabling an extension

You can enable extensions using `gemini extensions enable extension-name`. You
can also enable an extension for a specific workspace using
`gemini extensions enable extension-name --scope=workspace` from within that
workspace.

This is useful if you have an extension disabled at the top-level and only
enabled in specific places.

### Updating an extension

For extensions installed from a local path or a git repository, you can
explicitly update to the latest version (as reflected in the
`gemini-extension.json` `version` field) with
`gemini extensions update extension-name`.

You can update all extensions with:

```
gemini extensions update --all
```

## Extension creation

We offer commands to make extension development easier.

### Create a boilerplate extension

We offer several example extensions `context`, `custom-commands`,
`exclude-tools` and `mcp-server`. You can view these examples
[here](https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-cli/tree/main/packages/cli/src/commands/extensions/examples).

To copy one of these examples into a development directory using the type of
your choosing, run:

```
gemini extensions new path/to/directory custom-commands
```

### Link a local extension

The `gemini extensions link` command will create a symbolic link from the
extension installation directory to the development path.

This is useful so you don't have to run `gemini extensions update` every time
you make changes you'd like to test.

```
gemini extensions link path/to/directory
```

## How it works

On startup, Gemini CLI looks for extensions in `<home>/.gemini/extensions`

Extensions exist as a directory that contains a `gemini-extension.json` file.
For example:

`<home>/.gemini/extensions/my-extension/gemini-extension.json`

### `gemini-extension.json`

The `gemini-extension.json` file contains the configuration for the extension.
The file has the following structure:

```json
{
  "name": "my-extension",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "mcpServers": {
    "my-server": {
      "command": "node my-server.js"
    }
  },
  "contextFileName": "GEMINI.md",
  "excludeTools": ["run_shell_command"]
}
```

- `name`: The name of the extension. This is used to uniquely identify the
  extension and for conflict resolution when extension commands have the same
  name as user or project commands. The name should be lowercase or numbers and
  use dashes instead of underscores or spaces. This is how users will refer to
  your extension in the CLI. Note that we expect this name to match the
  extension directory name.
- `version`: The version of the extension.
- `mcpServers`: A map of MCP servers to configure. The key is the name of the
  server, and the value is the server configuration. These servers will be
  loaded on startup just like MCP servers configured in a
  [`settings.json` file](../get-started/configuration.md). If both an extension
  and a `settings.json` file configure an MCP server with the same name, the
  server defined in the `settings.json` file takes precedence.
  - Note that all MCP server configuration options are supported except for
    `trust`.
- `contextFileName`: The name of the file that contains the context for the
  extension. This will be used to load the context from the extension directory.
  If this property is not used but a `GEMINI.md` file is present in your
  extension directory, then that file will be loaded.
- `excludeTools`: An array of tool names to exclude from the model. You can also
  specify command-specific restrictions for tools that support it, like the
  `run_shell_command` tool. For example,
  `"excludeTools": ["run_shell_command(rm -rf)"]` will block the `rm -rf`
  command. Note that this differs from the MCP server `excludeTools`
  functionality, which can be listed in the MCP server config.

When Gemini CLI starts, it loads all the extensions and merges their
configurations. If there are any conflicts, the workspace configuration takes
precedence.

### Custom commands

Extensions can provide [custom commands](../cli/custom-commands.md) by placing
TOML files in a `commands/` subdirectory within the extension directory. These
commands follow the same format as user and project custom commands and use
standard naming conventions.

**Example**

An extension named `gcp` with the following structure:

```
.gemini/extensions/gcp/
├── gemini-extension.json
└── commands/
    ├── deploy.toml
    └── gcs/
        └── sync.toml
```

Would provide these commands:

- `/deploy` - Shows as `[gcp] Custom command from deploy.toml` in help
- `/gcs:sync` - Shows as `[gcp] Custom command from sync.toml` in help

### Conflict resolution

Extension commands have the lowest precedence. When a conflict occurs with user
or project commands:

1. **No conflict**: Extension command uses its natural name (e.g., `/deploy`)
2. **With conflict**: Extension command is renamed with the extension prefix
   (e.g., `/gcp.deploy`)

For example, if both a user and the `gcp` extension define a `deploy` command:

- `/deploy` - Executes the user's deploy command
- `/gcp.deploy` - Executes the extension's deploy command (marked with `[gcp]`
  tag)

## Variables

Gemini CLI extensions allow variable substitution in `gemini-extension.json`.
This can be useful if e.g., you need the current directory to run an MCP server
using `"cwd": "${extensionPath}${/}run.ts"`.

**Supported variables:**

| variable                   | description                                                                                                                                                     |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `${extensionPath}`         | The fully-qualified path of the extension in the user's filesystem e.g., '/Users/username/.gemini/extensions/example-extension'. This will not unwrap symlinks. |
| `${workspacePath}`         | The fully-qualified path of the current workspace.                                                                                                              |
| `${/} or ${pathSeparator}` | The path separator (differs per OS).                                                                                                                            |
